[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Fixed Slab memory problems - *1st May, 2026*

I took a long time for this change, but I had school and exams in the way, and some other stuff.

I didn't like how the architecture stuff were arranged, so I started with that, since I lacked the motivation to do anything else. I just randomly decided to test it on a real computer, and it completely failed, Page faults were everywhere.

These page faults pissed me off so much, I decided to make a bunch of debugging stuff just to help me out. I used them to hunt down each error and fixed them. It was all a bunch of stupid stuff, like in the HAL stubs:

```c
static inline uint32_t save_disable_interrupts() {
    uint32_t flags;
    asm volatile(
        "refe: \n\t"
        "pushfl\n\t"
        "popl %0\n\t"
        "cli"
        : "=r"(flags) :: "memory"
    );
    return flags;
}

static inline void restore_interrupts(uint32_t flags) {
    asm volatile(
        "pushl %0\n\t"
        "popfl"
        : : "r"(flags) : "memory", "cc"
    );
}
```

This is the proper functions: I accidentally messed up before because I forget these functions, and google them, but google doesn't realise we are on 32-bit, and thus give ones for 64-bit or something else, and I end up using them like a dummy.

I decided I wanted to remove unnecessary stuff from the kernel, so I did. Also wanted to make the `config` function for the m-command, because I was very bored. I genuinely don't recall much of what I have done since the last commit, because I was very occupied with exams, especially chemistry. Gave up on it so bad I just sat with the chemistry teacher the entire day to explain the whole portions to me... and she did, some why, which was genuinely sweet, but I have no clue if I did well or not.

Regardless, I still have the AHCI to make.
