[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# ACPI Implementation

I wanted access to more hardware, but it seems most of them are locked behind certain hardwares I have to get access to before that. I want the CPU fan, power button, etc., so I can finally run my kernel into another computer instead of emulating it. Though, I can do that, just not cleanly, and I would have to hold the power button just to reboot it, and have to keep writing to a USB to run it each time.

I realised everything I needed requried me to have a ACPI, which I mentioned in the previous journal entry, that it required the following:

1. malloc and free
2. Interrupts
3. Schedulers
4. PCI

Fortunately, we had all of them, but what sucked, is having to somehow put this code Intel made into my kernel properly. I tried writing the `acfarix.h` file, but it was literally pain, because most of the time, there were no documentation, and I had to keep guessing what the proper defines were based on the `aclinux.h` that came with the APCICA files. I also had to delete the specific files, and made the `make.py` file also ignore certain files and folders, because ACPICA comes with its own compiler and standard library. We already have a standard library from newlib, so I had to disable these manually.

If Intel ever updates ACPICA, I can just plop these files and folders in, and everthing will continue to run, assuming ACPICA didn't somehow change how the `acfarix.h` file has to be.

Had to make a lot of stuff just for the stubs to get everything to finally work, because, I swear, the stubs were a pain. ACPICA has little to no documentation, and I had to rely on the explanation LLMs, and I have no idea how they know it, but I didn't care, because the naming conventions were so stupid.

For future me, or anyone who wants to understand what each function does, I left comments over these functions for anyone who was also trying to implement ACPICA for somereason.
