[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Silicon Verification - *14th April, 2026*

*12th April, 2026*

I decided to move from having a kernel shell, I wanted the shell to be seperate, like an executable, that we execute in `kmain` instead. This would make it easier to move the shell around, of course, and make the kernel closer to completion.

I made changes to the makefile to accomodate these future changes, so I don't have to worry over it later. I tested it out, and it seems to function perfectly. One problem - I have no idea if the kernel actually works on a real computer or not.

To test this, I made a feature in the makefile to put the compiled BIN file into a given USB. This USB file will be reformatted to be able to run with GRUB, assuming you set it up on the client device properly. Once this is done, I actually tested - it cutely failed. So, I am currently on a treasure hunt to find out where, and it seems it failed on `sti`... somehow, and I have no idea how. It is probably the timer, scheduler, or something assembly, the stack, whatever. It could be anywhere at this point.

*13th April, 2026*

Swapping USB in and out of two computers is starting to get annoying, so I decided I have to up my emulation system. Instead of using QEMU to emulate, the apparent "gold-standard" that is suggested literally anywhere I look, I decided to use bochs. Unfortunately, this required so much new makefile stuff, that I was getting annoyed with it all - it needed me to make a special ISO file and some more extra stuff, and I was not dealing with that.

Instead, I just made QEMU more "realistic", by forcing it to provide everything that a normal computer would also provide. This ensures that the emulation would be a bit more solid. I eventually got it to look like my actual computer; stuck after random points in `kmain`, and slowly solved all these problems.

These "problems" in question are a list of stuff I left in TODO.md and never bothered to fix them because they worked, and I thought the emulation was realistic enough for it. Unfortunately, this is not true, and I had to fix it all today. I can't believe I'm doing all this just for moving the shell into ELF. I think it's working, I'll check tomorrow, it's 11:41 am, and I have school tomorrow.

*14th April, 2026*

On my quest to make QEMU more realistic, I stumbled upon a long dead stick. The ATA driver failed to merit, for it hated what was of wit: old people left "legacy" ATA stuff, and made it more "dynamic", which made it so that I can't just "access" my pretty ATA from anyway - No, that's too simple. Instead, you have to use the PCI to manually scout out your ATA and load it in and then re-adjust the magic numbers.

I also **hated** just how many magic numbers I kept leaving in the code, because I never thought I would have to come back to it. I decided I was stupid, and finally made the ATA code more readable. The whole thing is really simple, but I have no idea why they had to make it like this.

I've also decided to pivot my focus from making my shelf *(shell.elf)*, and instead focus on trying to get the kernel to run on actual computer. Also, since the stuff was failing everywhere, I had to made these `t_print` and `t_printf` just to help me out, and make everything finally work. I still don't think it works on a real computer, but we do feel a step closer.

It seems plugging it into the real computer caused a page fault - which I am terribly proud of, because that means the IDT, GDT, and all the related stuff worked! It was literally perfect, because I am seeing my thing working on a real computer. Only problem is that I can't actually get it to work. Page fault would mean the `init` task (the task listed in the multitasking) was accessing memory it shouldn't be accessing.

Because this was such a pain, I decided I needed a better error handler, so I made it print more "english-ly", and also made a "panic shell". It's just to make it so that I can actually use the kernel even after a crash and maybe diagnose what happened. Here's the stupid problem - it seems the keyboard doesn't work on a real computer. I swear to God, if it needs me to use the PCI to just use the keyboard, I will literally crash out.

I know that the panic shell has bugs in the way it gets its inputs, but since its a debugging layer, and only I will be debugging it, I can't be bothered until I'm bothered. I also noticed a weird file named "{makefile.globals.DISK_PATH}"... I never made it, I have no clue where it spawned from, probably some error in the makefile that is now fixed, or something. To be fair, I have no clue.

Apparently the ATA wasn't working in emulation because I was stupid about the makefile. I made it make a file named "makefile.globals.DISK_PATH", instead of formatting the actual disk.img for the QEMU emulation. The ATA wasn't working in my real computer, because it uses whatever AHCI is (according to the Linux on it). Unfortunately, we (well, I) don't even know what that is, so until I do, ATA isn't going to work on modern ATA hardware.

I realised only one more thing remained: the ACPICA. Crooked thing apparently caused Page faults just because it wanted to unmap something. Thing is, I literally don't unmap at the unmap function. Earlier, when I used to do that, it used to page fault, because it tries to access pages it already unmapped. Now, it's unmapping a page, we don't even unmap, and it **STILL** page faults. Solution: don't do *solid excreta* on the unmap stub, just leave it.

I'm planning to fix this terrible thing that has befallen upon me by using the heap to manage the memory ACPICA needs in the future, because its much easier than the PMM/VMM setup everything uses, and would be easier to debug. That's for later though, the goal of this one branch was to make it run on a computer, and we do, so that's it for this entry.

Oh, I also made the "apps" folder no longer ignored, since the makefile assumes it exists.
