[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Initial commit - *16th Feb, 2026*

With the initial commit, the README.md contained this paragraph that I am moving here:

> An *(unfinished)* operating system I am designing, inspired by Linux and built on Caffeine. Note that I am not exactly the best OS Designer, but I have tried my best to leave comments almost everywhere to explain everything. An OS is something every developer wants to make, but almost everyone lacks the knowledge, courage, or maybe they just don't have the time. Fortunately, I have a lot of free-time, and I am stupid enough to think I can pull off building an OS. The only thing covering my idiocy is the smart people who wrote the [OSDev Wiki](https://wiki.osdev.org).

In the very first commit, I think I had been working on it for 2-3 days, and I only had a basic kernel set up. Looking back at it, it was terrible, because I barely understood what each piece of hardware was really doing. Matter of fact, I didn't even know what anything does except a little bit about the CPU. At the time, I was proud with it, because it was able to take keyboard input. It was incredibly frustrating, and I even resorted to asking Chat-GPT how to solve my problem. It seems no AI was able to help me, and I eventually tinkered around and researched enough to finally get it working. At the time, it was literally a text editor, and it had absolutely no functionality. I make sure to write everything myself without any AI assistance, but Chat GPT and Gemini failing to help me was the more frustrating than the problem itself. They sound so confident, yet obviously wrong, that it just pisses off that one neuron in my head.

It should be noted that my annual exams were going on at school, and I am in class 11, so I didn't have much time to properly build the OS, but I genuinely wasn't bothered over marks, so I just kept building the OS.
