[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Shell - *18th Feb, 2026*

The day before, I reorganized the code, but felt it was still going to get messy, so I structured every file to move into its own folder inside the [`src`](../../src/) and [`include`](../../include/) folders.

I decided that I also wanted my own implementation of the string class, because I wanted to implement the shell, and I wanted a clean way to organize a set of characters. Normally, you'd get stuff like strings, maps, heap, etc. through the standard library, but the standard library is provided by the OS. Our problem is that we are making the OS, so there is no standard library to work with - we have to make everything.

I made the shell, and it was nothing special, it just had a few basic commands: `help`, `clear`, `memstat`, and `echo`, and they were practically one line implementations. I also had the up and down arrow keys working, but manage to break it in a few changed later.

In any other project, the more implementations I added, the more complex the project became, till I eventually get tired of it and abandon it. This project was a curious one - the more implementations I add, the easier it gets to program the rest of it. This also meant I had to structure my implementation order such that everything would be well woven together. Unfortunately, I lacked the foresight to see how much of a failure my string class was, until much later down the project.

For some reason, I had the thought that I could implement the standard library myself in time. Quite obviously, I never make my own standard library.
