[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Multithreading - *19th Feb, 2026*

[This](https://wiki.osdev.org/Creating_an_Operating_System) page that was randomly scrolling through the previous night is where I find a list of missing features in my OS. The one I thought was easiest to implement that I didn't have yet was multithreading.

I looked at how other operating systems do it, and, to be honest, I don't like them, and they seem way too complicated for me to implement. I noticed that I *can* just build a basic system, and the part of the OS that manages each task can use a different data structure or algorithm later down the line. For now, my priority was simplicity.

The most straightforward way to have a set of tasks to iterate through may have been using a `struct`, such that each task object holds the actual function it has to do, as well as a pointer to the next text it has to go to. The idea was simple: each task would point to the next task, and the last task would point to the first task. This would form a circle, i.e. if you had three tasks $T_1$, $T_2$, and $T_3$, then $T_1 \rightarrow T_2 \rightarrow T_3 \rightarrow T_1 \rightarrow \ldots$, and thus this would go on forever till the OS ultimately ends. Each task also is given $10$ milliseconds to do their job, and I don't care about priority right now.

After that, I just had to design the `create_task` function to just change the `next` pointer of the current task to the new task, and set the new task's `next` pointer to the old `next` pointer of the current task.

As the OS grows, there would be much more tasks running than a couple, so there are obviously many places to optimize that I have thought up of, but I am too lazy to implement them right now, and I don't see the point in it.

1. Don't use a circular singly linked list. Use something else.
2. Use a separate 'pool' for sleeping tasks instead of leaving them on the main chain.

There are obviously more ways that I am not able to think of right now, but I know they exist.

Now, I am sure every developer had to debug something, and would spam `print` everywhere to find exactly where it crashes. In our OS, nothing informs us of an error, except the OS literally reboots, which was my only indicator for error. So, I overloaded the `echo` function from the terminal to integers too.

Also, remember when I said the heap allocate was terrible and needed much refactoring throughout the project? This was the first time. I noticed that we kept crashing no matter what I did to the task, and it doesn't crash if I remove the `malloc` and just fix it to something. I realised my heap allocate had a terrible problem - it had a maximum limit, and exceeding it meant it won't give you anything, and the OS crashes.

This was quite straightforward to fix - if we get to the end of the function without having an address to give up, just expand the heap, do the same `malloc` again. Right after implementing that, everything started working again.
