[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# FAT32 Sector limitation removal - *2nd Mar, 2026*

I start wanting to have the shell as an application in the operating system's file system, rather than a part of the kernel itself. The first way I wanted to fix this was by ensuring the file systems were robust and had no problems - there were problems. As earlier mentioned, I hard-coded the FAT32 file system to look only at the first sector of the directory. I fixed it by making it now look till it finds our file.

Besides that, I also realised how little storing only 200 lines was, so I made the terminal store the past 500 lines instead. While looking at the terminal's code, I spotted this line in `init_terminal`:

```cpp
terminal_color = vga_entry_color(VGA_COLOR_LIGHT_GREY, VGA_COLOR_BLACK);
```

I had completely forgotten to implement colors to the terminal, which is done generally using ANSI escape codes. I decided to leave it for the day and do it the next day.

# ANSI Escape codes - *2nd Mar, 2026*

Initially, my idea was to have this number that I actually left in the previous commit:

```cpp
// terminal.h
#define ANSI_COLOR_BASE 0xE000
/*              | ANSI_COLOR_BASE | color
 | Reset   | 0  | 0xE000
 | Black   | 30 | 0xE01E
 | Red     | 31 | 0xE01F
 | Green   | 32 | 0xE020
 | Yellow  | 33 | 0xE021
 | Blue    | 34 | 0xE022
 | Magenta | 35 | 0xE023
 | Cyan    | 36 | 0xE024
 | White   | 37 | 0xE025
 */
```

The idea was that I would have the `echo_char` look for characters bigger than the `ANSI_COLOR_BASE`, and we could assign special characters based on that number, and manage the ANSI escape characters using it. So, in the `syscalls.cpp` file, I wrote a function to parse a string with a simple logic: replace all ANSI escape code with `ANSI_COLOR_BASE | color`, and I was only focussed on colors at the time.

I thought it was a clean solution, but the parse was the most annoying thing to implement, so I just gave up on it and made a function directly in the terminal to handle it. Not only did it work, it would also be faster, because we skip a parser overhead. There is nothing to explain about the function, because it's literally just a bunch of if-else statements that eventually cover every case.
