[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Docker build environment - *20th April, 2026*

I showed my project to my CS teacher, who is also my class teacher, because 1. She's practically a homie *(friend-able individual)*, 2. She's also the only person I know that even *knows* what a kernel is. The project is slowly moving into Operating System territory more than kernel, so it will slowly become easier to explain what we made here.

She mentioned how she did read through my code and documentation for hours (probably the only person who would do that for me), and also explained what she thought of it. To me, she's more competent than me. If anyone is to understand the kernel, it's not me, it's her, and that's something I believe in. So, I was very happy to know that she says she understood a lot of it, and said it's good, and I should make it public. The problem: I'm shy, I don't like people seeing my code.

Regardless, it seemed the biggest problem wasn't even the code, it was the fact that, for someone who just cloned the repository, it's quite a headache to set up the dependancies. I realised I was stupid for assuming everyone's computer just casually has `gcc-arm-none-eabi` or something, so, to avoid that in the future, I decided to implement docker.

As far as I can see, I am only going to make this docker file for people who want to just compile the kernel and run it. Unfortunately, docker won't let us emulate in QEMU, so there is the annoyance of having to move in and out of docker to compile and emulate. If you just want to compile and emulate once, this is perfect. If you're someone who wants to actually change the code for their own project, then you can continue using the docker setup, but it is probably nicer to just install the dependancies yourself and do everything.

It took sometime figuring out the exact dependancies my m-funcs even ran on, considering I never bothered to properly think about other people using my code. I just assumed I'd be the only person until I asked another person to look.
