[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Ramdisk file system - *20th Feb, 2026*

As previously mentioned, the OSDev Wiki gave me a list of stuff I had to add. One of them was something I really wanted - a proper filesystem. Unfortunately, I found this complicated, and I wanted something simple, so I decided to start with ramdisk.

The principle of it is simple, as all it does is store your files and folders in memory. This also meant that if you turned off the system and turned it back on, nothing would be there again. That wasn't a problem for me, because I just wanted *some* file system.

To make this, I made my implementation of `map`, which, like `string`, would be terrible, useless, and absolutely worthless. Just to help me out a bit more, I also implemented a split method and a count method in the string. I am not even sure why I made them the way I made them, because later when I implement a Standard C Library, the old code becomes completely incompatible.

To interact with the new memory-based file system, I implemented very basic `touch`, `cat`, `write`, and `rm` for the shell. I have no clue why it is named `touch` (to make a file) and `cat` (to read a file), personally I would've gone with `create` and `read`, but whatever. I am also aware Linux has no `write` and uses the `echo` to write into a file, but I don't have that much fancy features to do that yet.

I had the foresight to realise that the file system needed an abstraction. I thought of having an `enum` store each of the file, then just use a switch statement to get the function we need to use, but I realised how terrible it was to use, and resorted to using an abstraction. I made sure to Google (in Gemini) if the thing I came up with has a name, because I was unsure of what to name it, and found its called a "Virtual File System"... for some reason, as if the other file systems *aren't* virtual, but I suppose VFS isn't even a file system, it's an abstraction.
