[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# FAT32 file system - *23th Feb, 2026*

Disks aren't the same as memory, and they remain even after it is closed and rebooted. Since I am simulating the OS, I have to create a `disk.img` file to act as a disk. The piece of hardware responsible for writing and reading onto the disk is called the ATA. I then did my research on FAT32, and I heard it was the easiest one to go with right now (it was not).

In the very first implementation, I hard-coded it to only work with the first sector of the directory, and I wasn't bothered with the specifics, as I just wanted a working version. I somehow got it all working, and passed it to the VFS abstraction layer. I had to make a `vfs_mount` function that would let you 'mount' onto a specific file system, so that I can swap between ramdisk and the FAT32 file system easily.

I also made the VFS abstraction layer take a `get_all` function, which just gives back the head of a linked list of `FileNode`, that the function using can go through. I remember trying to use an array, but using one would mean I would have to iterate through it once to get the length of the array, and then a second time to add each value into the array. I didn't like that at all, and the way to fix this was to build my own version of the `vector` that the standard library provides. I didn't want either, and made the creative decision in opting for a linked list, because it was just easier to use, and I had gotten fond of them since my multithreading implementation.

I also should note, that for simplicity, the root directory was defined to be "", simply because everything was going to use absolute paths, so the leading "/" would be redundant. Furthermore, the shell was to be responsible for resolving relative paths.

I also wanted folders, so I made the `mkdir` command in the shell. The side-effect of all these were straightforward: the `map` and `string` implementations needed more methods. Specifically, `keys`, `capacity`, and `getEntryInternal` for `map`, and `upper`, `substr`, `find`, `starts_with`, `ends_with`, and `contains` for `string`. Again, I am not sure why I made any of these the way I made them, because the standard library doesn't work the way I made them to be.

There were some memory problems, so I tried to increase the stack size from 16 KiB to 64, which is extremely generous. I found out the problem was, and brace yourself, the heap allocator. When the heap expands, it doesn't properly connect back. There were some more issues, but I was just too tired with the FAT32 implementation, that I just gave up and went to sleep.
