[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller - *24th April, 2026*

Towards the AHCI, I realised we need the APIC. The old PIC did us well, but we have to give it up now: it won't support the newer hardware, apparently, nor will it let us run the kernel on multiple cores, and literally anything expected of an operating system today. Of course, the way to do this is a very cruel process: remap the PIC and, effectively, kill it by masking it off and letting its signals drown to a void of nothingness.

Once that was done, we go through the whole initialisation process. Eventually, we reach the function *(I misspelt "functoin" 3 times in a row, had to mention)* that enables the IRQs. For x86, this is the APIC, which would take over the kernel after its ancestor, the PIC, which x86 ran ages ago.

The whole thing isn't even that complicated, I was just a dumbo while making it. See, I referred the OSDev wiki while making it, and it didn't work. I just got a black screen (because the PIC is masked off, the kernel just has no hardware-software communication, so nothing is going to be there), and I thought the problem was, obviously, the APIC.

I referred other kernels, LLMs, documentations, etc. to just fix it, and, by mistake, left two lines that I thought we needed:

```c
irq_unmask(14, 0x2E);
irq_unmask(15, 0x2F);
```

*The Kernel will remember that.*

I continued on, trying to fix it, but it hit the `default_handler_stub`, an implementation so old, I was wondering why `!!` printed at the top. I then promptly remembered what caused it, and decided to dig into it. I realised just how ancient the whole IDT was, and decided to scrap the whole `!!` idea to inform me that a crash occurred. Like what do I do with that fact? It crashed? Yay? What do I do with the information? I get nothing off of `!!`, because it was a super primitive feature. The kernel has aged and grown since then, so I replaced it for interrupt 15: Unknown interrupt.

Of course, when I got the panic screen, I was joyous, because I could debug properly. Unfortunately, it was quite a pain, because the panic shell wasn't exactly functioning, so I went on a detour fixing that. Eventually, I got it all to work, and I suppose relying on `printf` when the whole kernel has suicided isn't the best idea.

Once I got my panic shell acting cute, I decided to add in a `peek` command. Using this, I decided to read the values at the address of the local APIC (virtual address), which I found was `bee00000`. The peek command said:

```
[0xbee00000] = 0x00000000
[0xbee00110] = 0x00004000
```

This was useful: it meant the unknown interrupt that was causing all this is the 46th interrupt (32 + 0x00004000), and I just had to figure out what was there. Apparently storage hardware stuff... oh yea, I added those two dumb lines. The moment I removed those lines, the entire kernel started functioning super well.

It gave me memories of when I implemented the GDT, because it all just started functioning a *bit too well*. It was quite suspicious, I barely trusted it, but it seems the PIC is masked off, but the whole kernel is running anyway, so I assume the APIC is doing its job, hopefully.

Besides that, I realised that the kernel takes a while to compile, so I added a performance counter to the compiling function. I'll also eventually make the function to create `farix.iso`, but I'm kind of lazy, I'll make it later. We're also nearing the 100th commit.

Honestly, I was terrified of the APIC, because I hated the prospect of the entire kernel no longer working just because this thing wouldn't work. With any other new thing, the rest of the kernel is still moving, but only that thing might not work. With stuff like the PIC and APIC, the whole kernel seems to rely on it, and that's scary. Fortunately, it just somehow works, and I hope it stays like that.
