[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Standard C Library - *26th Feb, 2026*

This is where I regret my `string` and `map` implementations.

That OSDev Wiki page mentioned how a standard library would be important to have. When I looked it up, I realised that the standard library was *slightly* larger than I thought, and that I am never making that in time. I wanted to have a functional and clean kernel before my class 12 started (4th of the next month), so there was no way I could make all of it in one week.

I resorted to just using `newlib`, but that required me to explicitly define out everything for it, which wasn't a problem since we already made everything. The *real* problem came when I wanted to stop using my `string` and `map` class for the standard library's implementations. Confidently, I deleted the `string` and `map` implementations, and went through each file, painstakingly editing everything to match the standard library. I had to literally rewrite the entire FAT32 system's code. It was a nightmare, that I somehow survived. Of course, because of all the changed, I went an checked if everything worked - it did not. The FAT32 file system was completely broken, nothing seemed to work, and I was getting frustrated.

Initially, the kernel kept crashing whenever I tried to create a file and read it, but it would crash very weirdly. If I created a file, wrote to the file, then read it, it would crash. If I rebooted the OS and used a file I had already written to, then I can read it as many times as I want without problem, until I try to write to it, then it would crash. In fact, this was so random and bizarre, but had a clear pattern, because it would occur only in specific sequences, and I thought the file system was flawed. While debugging, I ran (if I recall properly) the `help` command twice by accident - it crashed! That was news, because that meant the problem was not the file system, but somehow the new `libc` introduction.

Unfortunately, I was already a bit too deep inside this, and I refused to undo all the progress because "I can't figure this out." It was because of, and to the surprise of absolutely nobody, the heap allocator. I tinkered around, until I found the problem through a very shoddy function that points at a heap corruption when it occurs. Apparently, reading a file would corrupt the heap addresses, and when I try to write to a file, it would read garbage data, and just crash. This was true for almost every function - even `help`. I eventually find where the problem originated from, and patched it.

These heap allocator problems were obviously becoming ridiculous, and the `memstat` function was very useless at telling me what was going wrong exactly. So I refactored the shoddy function I made to point at heap corruptions into a feature, and made the `memstat` command tell me exactly where heap corruptions are. This would help me pinpoint the source of all errors in the heap allocator from now on.

If I had to start over this project, I would definitely create the bootloader first, then a terminal, keyboard support, memory management, and immediately implement the standard library right after. Had I done that, I could've saved myself this headache.
