[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Mouse implementation - *28th Feb, 2026*

The `memstat` implementation from the previous day would print the memory addresses really quickly, and each on a new line. There was no way to actually scroll up to the contents above the screen.

I could make the scroll through the terminal, or finally implement the mouse. Unfortunately, the mouse behaved very differently from the keyboard. Eventually, I figure it out, but it was a pain to configure the `init_mouse` function, because of which, I also made an `init_keyboard` function.

I was happy with the mouse. During testing, I noticed it properly found relative positions (touchpad/mouse conveniently don't keep track of absolute positions), as well as left and right click, and even the scroll.

# Terminal scrolling - *28th Feb, 2026*

I finally got the mouse to do the reason I made it - scroll. I don't care about anything else as of now. It was unfortunately a pain to do this, because I accidentally kept saving the lines wrong. I would save top most line to the bottom when we moved the terminal down a line, so the line order gets messed up.

I used a doubly linked list to manage this, so it was annoying to debug. I asked Gemini to write me a function to just print our the linked list out into my computer's terminal, since I can't really use the terminal in my OS, as I am debugging it, and it doesn't work. I found the error, patched it, and it seems to work.

I also made a `kill` command in the shell to kill a running task, which could be greatly improved on:-

- Have a buffer store the *to be made dead* tasks, so that when the `schedule` function gets to it, it just sets it to dead and deletes it, instead of pausing the whole system and getting them and stopping it.
- Alternatively, use a doubly linked list, so we can get the immediate previous task, making removal $O(1)$.

But, like the rest of the multithreading implementation, I chose the simpler approach: To "kill" a task, you just pause the entire system, find that task, set its state to `DEAD`, and leave it. Eventually, the `schedule` function cleans it up and gets rid of it.
