[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Hardware Abstraction Layer - *3rd April, 2026*

I may have said I should opt for something easier after that ELF and VMM nightmare, but I decided suffering is my hobby.

I wanted to make something new, but realised that literally anything I make now would make it a nightmare to port to another CPU architecture. The obvious solution was to write an HAL that I can easily generalise later now itself. I also wanted to do this, because recently, my father bought me a raspberry pi after much insistence, and I now can use it, but I want to run *my* kernel on it. Unfrotuantely, they use ARM, so I might as well slaughter two sparrows with two mountains and build a framework for an HAL.

The way I wanted it was simple - when we compile for a specific architecture, we just use a set of files from a specific folder inside [`arch`](../../src/arch). Now when I tried to use the GNU Makefile to do this, it was quite annoying, because I had to check where stuff what. This nuisance was so annoying in fact, I rewrote the Makefile into [`make.py`](../../make.py), and the usage is actually nicer, and I detailed it in [`setup.md`](setup.md). To be fair, having a custom make file is so much better than using the GNU Makefile, it's actually so much easier, and I don't have to beg some AI overlord to explain to me why my Makefile says its wrong. I can also forget about the tab vs space stupidity Makefile had.

Also, since the number of lines in this journal is in the four digits (if everything was in one file), I decided to split it off into multiple files for cleanliness and tried my best to make it right. I think its all right.

Now it seems ARM is fundamentally different from x86. For starters, there is no IDT, they have EVT (Exception Vector Table), and there is just no GDT, TSS, etc. So all that I did for x86 is absolutely non-existent there. I am not sure if it's good or bad as of now.

To split it off more cleanly, I decided architecture specific files go inside the [`arch`](../../src/arch) folder, and everything else can stay outside. During compiling, we just compile with the source files in the respective architecture, and its sort of like having stubs - the headers declare, these files give them the body during compile time.

It's really late as I write this, 1:04 am, so I'll summarise most of it, because the majority can just be found in Google easily.

IDT is replaced with EVT, which has 8 addresses for everything, instead of the 256 IDT uses. This is because x86's IDT defines a specific interrupt for literally every single thing, while the EVT has more general interrupts, and its upto the function to know what is going on.

Memory is about the same way, except that x86 would traverse in 4 KB chunks, while arm likes to move in 1 kb chunks. This is quite the problem - PAGE_SIZE is defined to be 4 KB, which was perfect for x86, but using the same PMM logic and the same PAGE_SIZE in it would mean that in ARM, we currently waste 3 KB for every 1 KB we allocate.

There is obviously ways to fix this - track pages not fully filles, change out the PMM allocator to be a bit more flexible, etc. Unfortunately, I am very lazy to make these right now, and would like to not do this.

There are a bunch more other stuff, like the ATA, Keyboard, Mouse, even the terminal itself requires architecture specific implementations. This is such a pain, I am going to just leave it empty at arm32. The goal for me isn't to actually make arm32 work with x86_32, the goal is to just define the bare minimum of stuff so that we have an HAL system going, while we still can run on x86_32, which we can. We can officially seperated off everything, so I deem my work finished.

# Instant Shell outputs - *3rd April, 2026*

I realised that whenever we output something to the terminal, even something as small as the help command, we print everything character-by-character, which is obviously slow as hell (or maybe hell is fast, not sure). The solution is quite simple - just use a buffer and flush that buffer into the terminal when we are done. The problem is that the shell's buffer didn't seem to change anything. This was because the newlib stub I had:

```c
int _write(int file, char *ptr, int len) {
    if (file == 1 || file == 2) { // stdout/stderr
        for (int i = 0; i < len; i++) {
            echo_char(ptr[i]);
        }
        echo_raw(ptr, len);
        return len;
    }
```

Would still print char-by-char, so my buffers were quite useless. I kept them anyway, its not like its bad, because now we have a giant piece of data coming in, how do we optimize? Simple - don't print char-by-char. So I made a function:

```c
void echo_raw(const char* data, size_t len) {
    if (len == 0) return;

    // Pre-calcualte the total lines required by data
    size_t needed_lines = 0;
    size_t tx = cursor_x;
    for (size_t i = 0; i < len; i++) {
        if (data[i] == '\n' || ++tx >= WIDTH) {
            needed_lines++;
            tx = 0;
        }
    }

    // Early scroll
    size_t lines_available = (HEIGHT - 1) - cursor_y;
    size_t skip_lines = 0;
    if (needed_lines > lines_available) {
        size_t scroll_amount = needed_lines - lines_available;

        if (needed_lines >= HEIGHT) {
            skip_lines = needed_lines - (HEIGHT - 1);
            scroll_amount = HEIGHT - 1;
        }

        new_line_n(scroll_amount);

        if (scroll_amount >= cursor_y) cursor_y = 0;
        else cursor_y -= scroll_amount;
    }

    // Dump to VGA buffer
    size_t current_line = 0;
    tx = cursor_x;

    for (size_t i = 0; i < len; i++) {
        char c = data[i];

        if (current_line < skip_lines) {
            if (c == '\n' || ++tx >= WIDTH) {
                current_line++;
                tx = 0;
            }
            continue;
        }

        if (!handle_special_chars(c)) {
            if (cursor_y < HEIGHT) {
                echo_at(c, terminal_color, cursor_x, cursor_y);
            }

            if (++cursor_x >= WIDTH) {
                cursor_x = 0;
                cursor_y++;
            }
        }
    }

    update_line_history_current();
    update_cursor(cursor_x, cursor_y);
}
```

This is the final version of it, much changes had to be made around to make it work overtime. This was obviously incredible - just predict everything beforehand, and just write to the VGA directly. Before, `echo_char` had many overheads and cursor checks, etc. etc., it was horrible how slow it is to echo a single character. Instead, this just straight dumps the data in after pre-calculating everything.

Unfortunately for me, this was nice, but my test function `memstat` was located away in the heap files, so I took it out, and put it in the shell. When I did so, I was amazed just how fast it printed. I still had a problem, the output for `memstat` indicated terrible memory usage. I mean just to be clear, we store every line in a double linked list for the terminal, and this is literally a recipe for cache misses and memory fragmentation.

Obviously, since I knew the total number of lines I am going to store, I thought it was so good to store everything in a doubly linked list, because I would "get $O(1)$ look-up times". Wow, give me a round of applause, because I'm stupid for thinking that. I realised that this is actually terrible in every possible way. Since I did know the number of lines to store, why not just use a straight array of all the lines instead? So much easier, so much cleaner, faster, memory efficient, everything improves with it. So I did, and then I tested around `memstat` and I realised just how much nicer everything was.

Obviously, I had a bunch of troubles with scrolling, and for somereason, giant white blocks. I realised it just memory corruptions cuz of overflows, and I fixed them: tediously tracked each one till I got them all. Now it all works, at 1 am.

With the terminal optimized out for speed and memory efficiency, I decided I've done enough for the day, and I am to sleep. I will think of making the next thing later, not sure what.
