[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# ELF loader - *3rd Mar, 2026*

March 3rd is the day I actually write this journal, clean up the repository, etc. I wanted to be able to run the shell as an executable within the OS itself, i.e. the shell as an ELF executable file in the file system, and then we have some `exec` function that takes the path to it, and we just read it, and we execute it. Unfortunately, looking into executing stuff, I realised that I had certain stuff missing. For starters, my program never bothered about user mode (ring 3), and just let everything in kernel mode (ring 0).

The fix is fine as far as I can tell; the GDT, IDT, etc. were all perfectly fine with the ring 3 implementation. Before I moved on, I made sure to create a new chat with Chat-GPT and ask it about ring 1 and ring 2, and it said:

> Almost nobody uses ring 1 and 2.

As a result, I decided not to implement it. It seems the only places I *did* have to change was with the VMM, because `vmm_map_page` would map out a page in ring 0, when I really would only need it for ring 3. `init_vmm` maps out at ring 0, and that was perfectly fine, because that is the function the kernel uses. This fix was very trivial, and I even had the variable defined and just never used it:

```cpp
// vmm.cpp
// PAGE_USER was defined in vmm.h already
dir[pd_index] = (uint32_t) new_table | PAGE_PRESENT | PAGE_RW | PAGE_USER;
```

I found I had to make this thing called the TSS, which I quickly learned from Chat GPT, because I couldn't be bothered to learn everything through books or websites. All it does is set up a nice stack for the new executing file to use, so that it is in user mode, and isn't using the memory and stuff of the kernel.

I finally made [`elf.h`](../../include/fs/elf.h) and [`elf.cpp`](../../src/fs/elf.cpp) (deprecated). I made a very basic function, `elf_load_file`, whose entire purpose is to just set up all the memory and stuff for the actual ELF to execute. I can technically let everything run at ring 0, but then I'm not really building an OS, and I would feel dissatisfied, so I tried to implement ring 3, and it hopefully works. If we don't set up a very nice place for the ELF to execute, then the ELF can execute inside the kernel, and access kernel stuff, and that makes it ring 0. In my eyes, an OS is like the bridge between software and hardware, so I **needed** the programs to run in ring 3.

Of course, with the very first version of that function, I created a temporary C program, compiled it into an ELF file, and put the file (named `main.elf`) into the `disk.img`, then went to the kernel, and put:

```cpp
// kernel.cpp
elf_load_file("main.elf");
```

Of course, I expected to see nothing happen, but I saw something (unfortunately). It seemed that the program would boot, crash, reboot, run the kernel, crash, reboot, and this cycle went on forever. It seemed I had made an error. After immense tinkering, I eventually find our problem, although you should never ask me why this solved it. I just left something in my notes, and didn't put it because I thought we didn't really need it. I had to make `boot.s` let us use the `stack_top`.

```asm
.global stack_top
```

Then set `esp0` for the `tss_entry` to the address of that value:

```cpp
tss_entry.esp0 = (uint32_t) &stack_top;
```

I only saw that there was no crash, and there was no indicator it worked. I didn't like being in the dark, because it could somehow just not have functioned or something had gone wrong, and I wasn't really in user mode for it. To test this, I ran the OS through some more parameters:

```bash
qemu-system-i386 -monitor stdio -kernel farix.bin -drive format=raw,file=disk.img,index=0,media=disk -device virtio-mouse-pci
```

The `-monitor stdio` would let us sort of interact with the OS from our terminal as it is running. It is useful, because when I ran `info registers`, to get the values at the registers, I got:

```
CPU#0
EAX=01001a00 EBX=00000000 ECX=00000000 EDX=00101300
ESI=00000000 EDI=00000000 EBP=01002b5c ESP=01002b5c
EIP=00101404 EFL=00000246 [---Z-P-] CPL=0 II=0 A20=1 SMM=0 HLT=0
ES =0023 00000000 ffffffff 00cff300 DPL=3 DS   [-WA]
CS =0008 00000000 ffffffff 00cf9a00 DPL=0 CS32 [-R-]
SS =0010 00000000 ffffffff 00cf9300 DPL=0 DS   [-WA]
DS =0023 00000000 ffffffff 00cff300 DPL=3 DS   [-WA]
FS =0023 00000000 ffffffff 00cff300 DPL=3 DS   [-WA]
GS =0023 00000000 ffffffff 00cff300 DPL=3 DS   [-WA]
LDT=0000 00000000 0000ffff 00008200 DPL=0 LDT
TR =002b 00166f80 00000068 00008900 DPL=0 TSS32-avl
GDT=     00166f40 0000002f
IDT=     00166720 000007ff
CR0=80000011 CR2=00000000 CR3=0017b000 CR4=00000000
DR0=00000000 DR1=00000000 DR2=00000000 DR3=00000000 
DR6=ffff0ff0 DR7=00000400
EFER=0000000000000000
FCW=037f FSW=0000 [ST=0] FTW=00 MXCSR=00001f80
FPR0=0000000000000000 0000 FPR1=0000000000000000 0000
FPR2=0000000000000000 0000 FPR3=0000000000000000 0000
FPR4=0000000000000000 0000 FPR5=0000000000000000 0000
FPR6=0000000000000000 0000 FPR7=0000000000000000 0000
XMM00=0000000000000000 0000000000000000 XMM01=0000000000000000 0000000000000000
XMM02=0000000000000000 0000000000000000 XMM03=0000000000000000 0000000000000000
XMM04=0000000000000000 0000000000000000 XMM05=0000000000000000 0000000000000000
XMM06=0000000000000000 0000000000000000 XMM07=0000000000000000 0000000000000000
```

We actually don't care about anything here except the `CS` register, but looking at it, it has the value `0008` - ring 0. Meaning our program never left into ring 3. Furthermore, the `EIP` register should have had something bigger than `0x40000000`, because that was what was defined for the ELF file we're testing. Rather, the value is, evidently, still at the kernel - `00101404`. The `CR3` entry should also be the address of the `user_pd` variable defined inside `elf.cpp`, and we can see it has loaded.

I put `printf` everywhere to just print out the value of every variable, and on this specific print:

```cpp
// elf.cpp
printf("Entry: %x, Stack: %x\n", header.e_entry, user_stack_top);
jump_to_user_mode(header.e_entry, user_stack_top);
```

I saw the output in my terminal:

```
Entry: 4000000, Stack: c0000000
```

Which was fantastic, as that is exactly what I needed. This implied that the error must have been a page fault, and because there really was no error handling, it would silently fail and quitly slip back into the kernel's memory, which is ring 0. Now, curiously, the problem was not in any of the files, but rather in the `main.elf` file. The C program that is compiled to the ELF file was:

```c
// test file: main.c
void _start() {
    // A simple calculation to verify execution in GDB or via registers
    int a = 5;
    int b = 10;
    int c = a + b;

    // Since we don't have syscalls wired up yet,
    // we just loop forever so the CPU doesn't run off into garbage memory.
    while(1);
}
```

I thought this would work. The reason this didn't work is genuinely frustrating, and, I have to be honest, Gemini told me why it doesn't work, and there was no way I was going to figure this out. Essentially, this program *does* work, but not in the way we want it. When the compiler compiled this code, it saw that `a`, `b`, and `c` were all not used, so the compiler just deleted them from existence, and reduced our sample code to just a `jmp` instruction:

This does work, and the program properly executed, which is why we got the kernel to exist and not crash. The problem was that I had no way of seeing that it worked, because there was absolutely no feedback. Which is why I changed it out for this, to make sure we get feedback:

```c
// test file: main.c
void _start() {
    asm volatile("mov $0x1234, %eax");
    asm volatile("cli"); // This will trigger a General Protection Fault in Ring 3
    while(1);
}
```

Because this is supposed to be in ring 3, `cli` is forbidden for it to use, so this would cause an error and tell the kernel, which would crash the kernel - feedback, exactly what I wanted. The `volatile` keyword makes sure that the compiler doesn't delete our stuff just because they do nothing. When this was compiled into an ELF file, and loaded on our OS, it worked - well it crashed, but that's it working! I also can verify it was working, because the earlier command to run `info registers`, told me:

```
EAX=00001234
```

That number came from the ELF file, which moved the value `1234` into the EAX register, which was further proof that it was working. This means that the CPU successfully:-

1. Switched to the new Page Directory.
2. Loaded the ELF into memory.
3. Jumped to Ring 3.
4. Performed the `mov eax, 0x1234` instruction.

I was too tired to continue on this anymore, so I left it, I'll add the rest of it for the next day. Unfortunately, my class 12 starts the next day, and it's honestly frustrating how little time I get. Fortunately, because it is Ramadan, the timings are much more nicer - 7 am to 12, but after that the timings are terrible - 7 am to 3 pm. It used to be till 2 pm, but the new principal says that "there isn't time for the syllabus to be finished in time", while the portions are literally less than the previous yes. I am not sure why, and adding that extra hour messes up everyone's life schedule, and I am not going to be able to work on this OS properly. Additionally, the school used to let Friday and Saturday be weekends, so it was the only time you could rest, but they took Saturday too now, and I can see how frustrating it's going to get.

Besides that short rant; I didn't like how the GitHub repository kept saying a portion of my code was in C, while there is absolutely zero C files. It's apparently because the header files count as C files, so I tried to fix it, I think it is ok now, but I have never used a `.gitattributes` file before.

As I write this, it's 12:12 am, and I'm going to sleep.
