[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter - *4th April, 2026*

I started the day with changing out the make file to compile properly for ARM32 too, so I made it so that you just define the specific compile functions for each architecture, it compiles on its own by those steps. This was nice, and I made it, but while compiling, it would throw a lot of errors on everything.

The majority of these were be forgetting to include some header file, but it also seemed to be that I had some assembly stuff I forgot to make global. Once that was done, I saw that stuff like `printf` were not getting recognized, and I found out that LibC had to be recompiled once for the arm32 architecture. I already had x86_32, but now I need both of them in this folder, so I can finally run my program. Unfortunately, this took so long (40-50 minutes), I just went ahead, refactored some x86_32 stuff while I waited.

Namely, I cleaned up the `init.c` file, seperated the `arch` folder from `src`, and renamed `src` to `kernel`, just to really seperate off everything. I went back to check on the LibC compilation, and it was not done yet, so I just kept going. I changed out the make file for the new directory changes, and tested it on a second terminal window, and it seems to be splendid. I kind of did all of this, because I wanted to implement actual graphics in the future, but I decided I don't want an "everything-in-one" type of thing. I am planning to use the kernel for other stuff, and graphics is often just bloat that is unrequired for specific stuff.

LibC eventually compiled, but I realised one problem - I sort of ignored the entire terminal, ATA (required for the disk file system), keyboard, and mouse, so none of those work in arm32. They are ok in x86_32, and I didn't understand this - but since I am trying to build this arm32 HAL, I obviously want it to run on any arm CPU, right? WRONG! Apparently, there is no VGA memory in arm, so I can't actually have the terminal thing.

When I realised I can't have my pretty terminal, I might as well write some way to move data back and forth from the QEMU emulation and my computer, sort of like they are wired together - serial ports, through UART. It's actually really simple, in x86.

Unfortunately, it seems I can't get it to work in arm, because the thing actually doesn't work. It seems to be crashing and rebooting constantly, which I verified by forcing a very early UART push, and it spammed "A" (the character I asked to print once), which meant it was crashing and rebooting constantly.

I actually have no idea what is causing it, mostly because I don't have a single thing set up, and nothing works in it. It seems we are getting out of the `arch_kmain` at arm32 though, and the crash is at `kernel_main`. I have actually no clue what is causing it, and I cannot be bothered to fix it today.

All I know, is that the UART works on x86_32, and I have a way to build an HAL if I want. Right now, arm is in ruins, I should've used leg or something, because this is just bad, I have no clue how to fix it, I have no clue how to debug it, I don't even get what I am to do with it, because I found out how annoying keyboard, mouse, etc. are on arm. I'll make them some day, but that day is not today.
