[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# ELF Executor - *4th Mar, 2026*

Yesterday, I made all the stuff I would need for loading an ELF file and sort of executing it, but the file running is never able to make an interrupt back, so we never see its output. I prefer to just do research on a specific topic, make a plan, write it all down, and only then will I implement it. So, I have decided to leave these notes here:

1. IDT: Somehow let the doors be opened for the ELF program to jump back into the kernel safely.

As far as I can tell, I just need to register the `0x80` interrupt. I am not sure if this is going to be annoying, but I also need to set the "Descriptor Privilege Level" to 3 (for Ring 3).

2. Assembly: A stub for the context switch.

We need it so that when the ELF file says `int 0x80`, the CPU saves the stack and stuff, and move back into the kernel settings. Fortunately, this is just another simple stub: push all registers, set the registers to the kernel data, call a C++ function to handle stuff, restore everything, `iret`.

3. Syscall: A C++ function to look at the registers to know what to do.

It seems the standard practice is to use the `EAX` register as the ID of the syscall, and the rest of the similar registers, like `EBX`, `ECX`, and `EDX` are used as the arguments for the syscall.

4. User library: The fun part that actually relays stuff to the ELF file

My concern for this is that I realise the way you do this is using assembly, because the syscall uses the registers to decide what to do, so we have to do weird stuff like:

```cpp
asm volatile("mov $1, %%eax; mov %0, %%ebx; int $0x80" : : "r"(stuff));
```

I'm not sure if I like that.

I start with the IDT because it seemed easy to start off with, and I found out that making it work in user mode and not kernel mode was as trivial as changing the value of the flag. So, I separated them:

```cpp
// idt.h
#define IDT_GATE_KERNEL 0x8E  // 1000 1110: Present, Ring 0, Interrupt Gate
#define IDT_GATE_USER   0xEE  // 1110 1110: Present, Ring 3, Interrupt Gate
```

Then, set the flag for all the old hardware stuff to the kernel's one, and to set the stub for our syscall:

```cpp
// idt.cpp
idt_set_gate(128, (uint32_t) syscall_handler_stub, 0x08, IDT_GATE_USER);
```

Apparently, that was it for the IDT. I defined the `syscall_handler` and its stub in [`boot.s`](../../src/boot.s), and all it does is store the values of the registers, push those to ESP, which is used as the arguments for the `syscall_handler`, and then restore the previous state.

I then made a struct to store the values of the registers, because my files are filled with structs, so I might as well.

```cpp
// syscall.h
struct registers_t {
    uint32_t edi, esi, ebp, esp_dummy, ebx, edx, ecx, eax; // Pushed by pusha
    uint32_t int_no, err_code;                             // Pushed manually in stub
    uint32_t eip, cs, eflags, useresp, ss;                 // Pushed by CPU on interrupt
};
```

This is just the values of the registers that was pushed. The logic for the syscall was straightforward (for now): if the EAX register is 1 (for writing), take the values at the other three registers, pass to write; if the EAX is 2 (for reading), just pass the other three registers into read; if the EAX is 3 (for exiting), just exit. Seems straightforward. Then, I changed our `main.c` file:

```c
void _start() {
    const char* msg = "Hello from User Mode!\n";

    asm volatile (
        "int $0x80"
        :
        : "a"(1),                   // eax = 1 (SYS_WRITE)
          "b"(1),                   // ebx = 1 (stdout)
          "c"((unsigned int) msg),  // ecx = pointer to msg
          "d"(22)                   // edx = length
        : "memory"
    );

    asm volatile (
        "int $0x80"
        :
        : "a"(3),            // eax = 3 (SYS_EXIT)
          "b"(0)             // ebx = 0 (status)
    );

    while(1);
}
```

I split the assembly stuff into two: the first one would let EAX be 1, thus it would be the equivalent of `printf(msg)`; the second assembly section would let EAX be 3, which is our `SYS_EXIT` code. Surprisingly, this worked, and there was so little I had to do, and I was really happy about it. I noticed my keyboard wasn't working anymore though, and I realised that I'm stupid, and called the `_exit` function, which was defined as:

```cpp
// syscalls.cpp
void _exit(int status) { while(1); }
```

Therefore, the OS is just stuck forever doing nothing.

I did my research part the previous night, and I wrote all of the code at 5 in the morning. I went to school, and now I am back home, had some errands, and right now, its 9 pm. I do not remember a word of what I did in the morning. I read back on the small notes I had left around, and I remember what we have to do now: A `farix.h` file, that is apparently better to be just a header file, that just bridges the gap between the kernel and the executing files.

My plan was to make it compatible with an existing operating system, like Linux, but it seems that this is quite a difficult plan, because the way our C library works is just different to how Linux handles it. I have a solution to this - just make a `linux.h` file that sort of 'translates' everything for our OS to read and then execute the ELF file. This *does* mean we have to implement every tiny bit of every syscall to be perfectly linux compatible, so I have decided to just make the Farix library, and we'll implement Linux (and maybe Windows, if I feel ambitious enough) in a future day, because it seems to be easily extensible - just read the ELF, check the OS it's compiled for, run with that OSs header file that we design.

For now, I wanted to make it so that everything worked in my OS. I defined this function:

```cpp
static inline int _farix_syscall(int eax, int ebx, int ecx, int edx) {
    int ret;
    asm volatile (
        "int $0x80"
        : "=a"(ret)
        : "a"(eax), "b"(ebx), "c"(ecx), "d"(edx)
        : "memory"
    );
    return ret;
}
```

It's just to help with the actual code, and then we have a [`user_syscalls.c`](../../src/libc/user_syscalls.c) file, which will handle all the system calls for the user. Crucially, it's not the same as the [`syscalls.cpp`](../../src/libc/syscalls.cpp) (deprecated) file, built for the kernel. I also realised that using a C file instead of a C++ file would clean up the code, because the only reason I keep doing `extern "C"` in C++ files is to avoid the name mangling that comes with it. I also renamed the `elf_load_file` function to simply `exec` for ease of life, and `exec` explains it more.

Right after that, I made the terrible error of trying to go after a feature more than what I just made. I noticed that when the ELF file was done with its function, I can't type back, which I mentioned earlier: the forever while loop won't let me go. To fix this, I decided let's put it in a thread/task - it didn't work, I'm not even sure, I tried my best to go almost everywhere to find why this was the case, but it's just race conditions. The ELF will work 50% of the time, and every other time, it would crash. I decided to undo all my changes and go back to what I made earlier.

When I got back to where we were before all the file system changes, ATA driver changes, etc. and came all the way back to just an executing function, I tried to run it in the kernel - it failed. I had no clue why, because it was the exact same code, or perhaps I had forgotten something: perhaps a line I left in by accident, or a line I forgot to delete. This was so annoying, until I realised... the `disk.img` I had didn't have the ELF file in there, so it just never found the ELF file, thus didn't execute the file.

I think I may have run `make clean` in the middle of the reversion, and didn't register in my head that I delete the `disk.img`, so I would have to put it back in. When I added the `printf` functions to tell me exactly what was going on, I found that it said:

```
ELF Error: File MAIN.ELF not found or empty
```

And when I finally ran `ls`, to my horror, it outputted nothing, so I mounted it onto my disk (I made a `debug.mk` file to do some extra helping for me):

```
mount:
	hdiutil attach -imagekey diskimage-class=CRawDiskImage disk.img
unmount:
	hdiutil detach /Volumes/FARIX
```

I put the ELF file back in, and it worked perfectly. I am not going to change this until I commit this.
