[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# Improved Scheduler Algorithm - *5th April, 2026*

Around like 2-3 weeks ago, I thought up of this weird algorithm that I thought was so elegant and clean. I wanted to implement it, but I realised it's a bit too complex for my small brain, so it would help if I wrote down the idea in text, then I can just build it from that text. It also helps for anyone who wants to understand (future me) what I did. I put it in the header file itself.

> My Scheduling algorithm
> 
> Not sure if it is made before, but this is how we go through it: Every single task would store the following facts that do not do anything other than make the scheduler move: the parent task (parent), whether we "passed" through (has_passed), next (next), and the next neighbor (neighbor)
> 
> The idea for this algorithm is quite strange, and I have no idea how it came to me, but I was trying to sleep when I thought of this, and I am not at all sure if this is exactly a good algorithm, but we'll see. Also note, I might be a terrible explainer, I am so sorry for this.
>
> Of course,any new tasks, would just be child tasks to it, and if those tasks call create_task, they become the parent task of the new task, and so on. We essentially generate a tree of parent-child relationships.
>
> Every single parent task, points to its first child. Every single child task, points to the next neighboring task. So each neighboring task, each child, is a circular singly linked list. When we move from init to its first child, we run that child task for its time, then the scheduler moves its first child, and so on, while labelling every task that we move through as has_passed = true. We determine the task to move to from the parent to the child simply by the "next" pointer.
>
> When we reach a leaf node, i.e. a task with no chlid task, we set the parent's "next" task to be this leaf task's "neighbor" task, then move up to the parent. At the scheduler, just check if the current task is "has_passed", if so, set the parent's task to the neighbor's task, and move up, and repeat this process till we reach init, who has no parent, but its "next" pointer is now the next task from the first task we did, and then we just repeat this process.
> 
> It's all O(1), there is an overhead of still passing and checking has_passed, but its elegant, it still moves through every task. I can't exactly see a way we don't, and there is a problem with orphaned tasks, but I suppose we can just move them to init or just delete it entirely with the parent. We don't really need to assign anyone any "priority", because the tree system does that on its own, it's literally part of the design.
>
> It should be noted, this was my first idea, but when implementing, I realised it was quite ugly, it looked bad, it needed to do that climb up logic, and it was just a mess, so I thought of a better algorithm.
>
> It's all the same pointer movements, but we do it on the way down instead, and when we reach a leaf node, we just shoot current_task to main_task, instead of letting it climb back up slowly.

To be clear, this all works in theory, and I have no mathematical proof that this definetely goes through every single task in any possible tree, but my instinct (and common-sense) says it works. I cannot be bothered, this obviously goes through it all, and I implemented it.

I have so much more of these ideas, I am just stopped by time, I can only dream these into existence. I am happy I got to put one of my ideas forth. It also means a task manager (like the tasks commands in the shell) can look cooler, since it's a tree, and not a flat array of tasks.

I also wanted to kill tasks, but managing these tasks flat is quite a problem. If we have this tree like system, it is absolutely horrible to move through these and find the task to kill. Trying to get one task is a weird navigation through my stupid tree structure. This is also terribly slow, as you can imagine, because it has the same problems as a linked list, except in the form of a tree.

The solution I got was to store all the tasks in a flat array, except, instead of storing a fixed number of tasks, we make fixed arrays and link them together like a linked list. This greately would reduce the linked lists, and is much more memory smart. I also got side-tracked with making the code automatically figure out the array and types and stuff:

```c
#define TASKS_LIST_LEN 16

#if TASKS_LIST_LEN == 8
    typedef uint8_t task_list_mask_t;
#elif TASKS_LIST_LEN == 16
    typedef uint16_t task_list_mask_t;
#elif TASKS_LIST_LEN == 32
    typedef uint32_t task_list_mask_t;
#else
    typedef uint64_t task_list_mask_t;
#endif

#define TASK_LIST_MASK_FULL ((task_list_mask_t)((1ULL << TASKS_LIST_LEN) - 1))
```

This will ensure my stupidity won't make a mistake in the future, because I am absolutely sure that will happen.
