[Back to journal.md](../journal.md)

# PCI Implementation - *8th April, 2026*

I want more hardware access that apparently the PIC can't give me, because it is old. I found out that what we really need is called APIC, literally just "Advanced PIC", and just has more access to stuff. It's apparently like an abstraction layer, but on the CPU instead, so you can ask the APIC to go fetch something, and I suppose it just gets it for you.

When I researched how APIC works, I found out that many computers and laptops are unfortunately annoying in the way the APIC works, because it seems there is no proper standard, and something, certain laptops, for example, may have something that would break whatever I make. So, unless I account for literally every single laptop ever manufactured, I am not going to be able to make it.

Just like the Standard C library, we're going to *cheat* with a library, apparently it's made by Intel, and it's called ACPICA, and though I have no clue how it's going to be implemented, I do realise it needs some requirements:

1. malloc and free
2. Interrupts
3. Schedulers
4. PCI

Of these, we have malloc and free from the newlib (as well as the heap allocator, kmalloc and kfree); we have interrupts, the IDT, and we have a nice schedulers, that we literally just updated. I have no clue *why* it needs the schedulers, I'll probably find out while trying to put it in here, but we have it regardless.

The only thing missing was the PCI, which is apparently *very* formally defined (refer [here](https://ics.uci.edu/~iharris/ics216/pci/PCI_22.pdf)), but the PDF is literally 322 pages long, and I am **not** reading all of that. I just asked Gemini to summarise it for me, and I understood the document from it, and when I was done, I made what we have, which is mostly just defined stuff anyway, and there is nothing new or fancy I can really do.

I did add the fact that we could store the devices in an array for future access and ease; we could even store specific devices like 'fan' in a specific pointer, or just store the index of it, so we can reference it later through the array instead. Of course, it literally does not matter how stuff works, since everything is defined, I don't get to choose much here, like the PIC before.

There is a chance I realise we don't have the sufficient stuff (or patience) for me to build out with the ACPICA, and might give up, but I think I have to atleast try and give it a shot. I am making this commit as the last checkpoint where everything (probably) worked, and I hope the next commit is tomorrow or something, I don't want to spend a month debugging this.

Also, I really hated having to manually check from git if I made sure everything was right, so I made a lint.py file to just do that for me. It just goes through the stuff I keep forgetting everytime, like the copyright text GNU GPL v3 wants you to copy-paste everytime, or the "TODO REM" I leave everywhere while debugging, and just a bunch of stuff. I also made it demand alphabetical include arrangement, because I feel that makes it cleaner: the folders come closer, so they look on the sidebar in my editor. It's just preference at this point.
